Don thank you for coming on. Thank you Carlos for inviting me. It's a pleasure to be back.
Yes, I'm so excited and the viewers are too to have you on for round three. For anyone who
hasn't yet caught the first two rounds of our conversations, those will be linked below in
the description. People who want to catch up. And today what we'll do is we'll type some loose ends
and cover some topics that we haven't had time for in previous conversations. And as an extension
from round two, where we primarily covered your fusions of consciousness paper, which came out
earlier this year. And just to give the audience a very brief summary of what that paper entails,
as you propose a theory of a network of conscious agents that serves as the basis of the fundamental
level of reality. And then emerging from that through a series of steps is everything that we
know. So everything is space and time, quantum dynamics, everything comes emerges from that
from that proposal. So I'd love to hear and get it kicked off here. What has been the reception
to that paper so far? Well, it pretty well, it's it's already been cited. So it's pretty early
for a paper to be cited. Yeah, literally same year. And in the that journal, apparently,
that's the highest downloaded paper in the last of papers, all their papers in the last six months
or something like that. So Wow. So it's gotten not a no 11 or 12,000 downloads, which for a geek
paper is pretty good. That's a pretty great in entropy, right? That's an entropy, right?
So that's awesome. Yeah, it's pretty good. But of course, the proposal itself is quite radical. So
I expect and enjoy pushback and feedback. That's how science works. If you put out radical proposals,
you need to be prepared for all sorts of counters. And that's how you learn. Absolutely. And it takes
time. Yeah, as you put it, it's very early, early days. But it doesn't take time for people to
write critiques and get back and to build off the theory itself. And one thing I'd be really
interested to hear about is core to your to your work is the Amplity Hedron. So the work from Neymar
Connie Hamed, his discovery, or maybe invention, I think it's probably more of discovery, but of this
geometrical object that sits outside of space time. I was wondering, do you I haven't quite seen any
collaborations with between you and Neymar. But have you spoken with him? Are you have any
dialogues with him around your ideas? Not yet. I mean, I think I would enjoy doing that at some
point. The Amplity Hedron, by the way, is for massless particles. And so it's not the whole story
as Neymar himself would say, working on other structures like the EFT Hedra that are for all
particles of all masses and spins. The real deep structure there is the decorated permutations.
So we've really connected with decorated permutations. We have a, in the fusion's paper,
we show how to take any Markov chain and map it canonically into decorated permutations. So we
give a dynamical, for the first time, a dynamical interpretation of these Amplity Hedra, well,
the decorated permutations behind behind the Amplity Hedra, in terms of entities that are
undergoing a Markovian dynamics. So yeah, we'll see where that leads. But we've been then
using that to figure out, okay, how do we map from the Markov chain now to specific properties,
like momentum and spin and energy and so forth. Because the decorated permutation link does tell
us what parts of the Markov chains to focus on when we're trying to think about how they map
to particles. So that was the real win in getting the fusion's paper result, that it showed us what
part of the dynamics we needed to focus on in trying to figure out the mapping between the
concentration dynamics and properties of particles, like position momentum and spin and energy.
Gotcha. And one thing I, as I was doing research prepare for this conversation, I stumbled upon
a presentation you gave last year at Chapman University at the mine and agency conference.
And I was going through that and noticed you had a slide, and maybe I'll even, with your permission,
I can overimpose this, just so folks can see it, showing the links from the conscious agent
level all the way up to the Amplity Hedron. And I was wondering, are there any differences, because
if I recall, it was asymptotic behavior, feeding into permutations, feeding into Birkhoff polytubes,
feeding into the positive grass mania, and then feeding into the Amplity Hedron. So it's a lot
of steps there. And is that where you landed with the fusion's subconscious paper? Because I think
when we discussed it, there were, maybe it's condensed the levels a little bit. But is that
still accurate? Is that still the same framework? Shortly after we gave, after I gave that talk,
we discovered this projection onto the decorated permutations. And so we actually
view this as a step forward from the talk that I gave at the Chapman University, that there we
were mapping onto the asymptotics directly, but we were trying to figure out how that mapping went.
We didn't understand exactly how we would project onto the asymptotics. And it was in thinking through
that, that we discovered this mapping onto the decorated permutations, which gave us a direct
link into the deepest structure that the physicists have found. So I'm actually much happier. And I
have a talk that I gave at Stanford, which is similar to the Chapman talk, but the Stanford talk
is like the Chapman talk, but it updates that slide and talks about the new results about
mapping markup chains into decorated permutations. And so we worked pretty quickly to get that paper
out by this January. The fusion's paper, will we go into that? Gotcha. Okay, I'll have to look for
that Stanford talk and I will link to that in the description of this video for curious viewers.
Because also, I think I noticed that talk, whoever uploaded it, the volume is extremely low
on that Chapman University. So I had to turn it up all the way and put on captions in order to
follow what was happening there. Yeah, sorry. Stanford talk is a little bit easier to understand
and get to here. And there we have the updated for the fusion stuff. But even since the Stanford
talk, we've been made far more of progress. Things I would have loved to talk of Stanford,
but we didn't discover them yet. Yeah, it's happening too fast. And one question from one
of the commenters on the last video was from Dennis Sovin. He asks, or she I make sure,
extremely interesting. Thank you. Are there any experimental evidence available? Or do you have
any projects planned to prove the fusions of consciousness proposal? Yes, we have. We've been
working on a computational experiment to do this to test this. So and the logic of our experiment,
we need to find something inside space time that we can explain based on this dynamics of
conscious agents beyond space time. So the question is where what there's lots of stuff in
space time to try to target to try to explain with a computational experiment. So what is the most
intelligent and most accessible thing that we could do? And you might say, well, neuroscience,
right? That seems to be the most related to consciousness. And so if you're having a theory
of consciousness from outside of space time, surely you want direct related directly to brain
activity. But that's brains are really complicated physical objects. You know, some people say
they're the most complicated thing that people have ever discovered in space time.
That may not be where we want to start. Of course, ultimately, we ought to understand it. And
I'm a cognitive neuroscientist. So I've actually studied the brain for for decades and done FMRI
and EEG and collaborative experiments and so forth. But if we're having a theory outside of
space time and mapping it into space time, what we want to do is test it where it's the simplest
and easiest to test it. And so what we're proposing is to test it
at what particle colliders are finding when they study the inside of protons. So they smash
electrons into protons, for example, a very high energy electron ion colliders. And they
look at what happens, you know, you destroy in many cases, you destroy the proton in the process,
but you see all these quarks and gluons and a sea of quarks or it depends on the energies,
what they call the the Q squared, the energies and also the the temporal resolution that the
Bjork and X and so forth. So what we're proposing to do is, and this proposal will come out in on
June 24, it's, you know, it'll be made public on June 24. We're proposing a series of experiments
to show that we can get the exact momentum distributions of the the quarks and gluons at
the all the various values of Bjork and X and Q squared that have been tested at at colliders,
in other words, to map to match the momentum distributions exactly. And so we would need
to find a master Markov chain, and a specific set of trace chains, so called Markovian trace chains,
and then temporal windows of sampling of those trace chains that give us exactly
the sequence of momentum distributions from high Q squared and Bjork and X, you know, all the values
that they that they map. So that's what we're going after. And again, that sounds, well, gee,
you're going after, you know, high energy particle physics, that sounds really, really
complicated. I want you to start with neuroscience. It's just the opposite. The particles, what are
particles? The elementary particles, physicists will tell you, are nothing but the irreducible
representations of the Poincare group of the symmetries of spacetime. In other words, they are
the most simple aspects of the actual geometry or symmetries of the geometry of spacetime.
So if we're going to make a connection, that's where we have the most data, and where it's
complicated, as it might seem, it's the least complicated thing that we can do. So that's
why we're going after that. I'm not a particle physicist. I'm learning as much as I can. But
fortunately, we've been joined by a world class particle physicist, Schrapo and Chatterjee,
who's who's collaborating with us on this, who, you know, likes our ideas. And so we have a real
first rate particle physicist who's been at the forefront for, I don't know, 30 or 40 years.
That was CERN and Fermilab, who's not collaborating with us, Chaitan and Prakash. And we have a
student, Ben Nepper, and then me, so four of us working on this idea. So that's where we intend
to go. Then we want to crawl our way up. Of course, eventually we want to get to, you know,
brains and neuroscience and so forth. But if you can't get quarks and gluons,
you're not going to get brains. You got to start where, you know, where there's really hard data
and where people can really push. And you can you really know the mapping from the dynamics of
conscious agents, precisely into space time, at the smallest scale. And then you can crawl your
way up. I presume we're going to have to crawl our way up through, like, we're starting with,
you know, sub nuclear physics, then we need to go to nuclear physics, then we need to go to chemistry.
And then we can crawl our way up to biology and then to brain science. We need to go systematically
and make sure each step up is secure. So yeah, the question is, of course, a great question.
And we have to start, we have to reverse the ladder of physics, we have to start at the bottom,
quote unquote, and climb up the ladder, the typical way that people think about physics and
all the way up through biology. They think of it as the basic science and then the special sciences,
right? We're turning it around, we're saying, no, wait a minute, physics is not the basic science,
consciousness is, and physics is just the simplest part of our interface. It's the most
elementary part of our interface. And so that's why we're connecting with the simplest part of
the space-time interface, and then building our way up to the more complicated parts of it. Sure.
Great question. Yeah, yeah, thank you, Dennis Oven. And I might have some other, yeah,
commentary questions sprinkled throughout here as well. So really appreciate that. If people
will comment below with questions, you know, that's, that's, that's, that's be really great.
I actually think this, this feeds into something that we've literally, I've mentioned at the end of
both of our interviews where I was like, I can't believe we didn't get to this one topic because
I really want to talk to you and dive deep into this. It's the UVIR interaction, which I learned
about through your interview with Jonathan Pageau. And can you explain what this is for the audience?
I think that there's some deep implications here, and I have a bunch of different questions to ask
you about that. But could you, could you set us up with, with what this is? Yeah, it's, it's
truly profound and important aspect of modern physics. It, the, the big success in physics has been
reductionism until recently, right? Statistical thermodynamics is an incredibly successful field
where you can explain phenomena like heat and entropy and heat and thermodynamics at a macro
scale by thinking about reducing to smaller scale and looking at the dynamics of little
particles and looking at the, their distribution of entropy and so forth. That gives you a deep
insight into heat and thermodynamics. So that's, that's a real win for standard reductionist
kinds of thinking. And the hope had been that, well, we can just continue that we can just keep
going. So the kind of reductionism I'm talking about is, I mean, there's many kinds of reductionism,
but I'll be very specific about the reductionism. As you go to smaller and smaller scales of space,
the hope is you'll get to more and more fundamental elements of reality and more and more fundamental
laws. And the hope is that, that will continue forever. We will continue to go to smaller and
smaller scales, find more and more fundamental constituents of reality and, and more and more
fundamental laws that govern those. And that, and that has worked up dramatically well. But
we actually know that our, our best theories of physics, namely Einstein's series of spacetime,
special and general relativity and quantum field theory are, which is based on spacetime. The
fields are defined over spacetime. So the, our modern best physical theories, which are, you
know, assume spacetime at their core also tell us the very mathematics of those spacetime based
theories tell us that spacetime itself cannot be fundamental, that it ceases to have any
operational meaning at the Planck scale, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, 10 to the minus 43
seconds. And what you find is, as you try to go smaller and smaller, but for example, using
light with finer or radiation with smaller and smaller wavelengths, right? That's how you resolve
finer and finer details. Well, when you do that, you know, quantum theory, in fact,
Einstein in 1905 is equals H new kind of with light tells you that you're going to get more and more
energy. The smaller the wavelength, the more and more energy. And then Einstein also told us in
1905 that energy equals mass. And as theory of gravity tells us, well, that Matt, you know,
as you increase the mass energy density of the vacuum, space is going to curve. And the problem is
when you get beyond a certain point of mass energy density, spacetime gets a singularity,
it actually falls apart, you get a black hole. And so it ceases to have any operational
meaning. And this is well known. I mean, for example, in 2005, David Gross published a paper.
He won the Nobel Prize in 2004, by the way, for his work on, I think, quantum
criminodynamics. So in 2005, you know, basically, you know, celebration of Einstein, you know,
the centenary of Einstein's special relativity theory, 1905 to 2005, he basically said, thank you,
you know, wonderful job, and now spacetime is doomed. And that's the way science works, right?
You thank people for their incredible contribution. And then you show the holes,
and the way forward. And so he pointed out spacetime is doomed and cited a bunch of people
who are saying spacetime is doomed. And the problem is this, what you mentioned, the UVIR.
Typically, so UV, physicists talk about UV when they say they're going to smaller and smaller
scales with higher and higher energies. So an IR is what they talk about when they go to, you know,
larger scales and lower energies. But it turns out as you try to push to smaller and smaller
scales, you're trying to go UV, more and more UV, what happens is you create a black hole.
And as you put more energy in, the black hole gets bigger. That's so you're starting to get bigger.
So now the scale is getting bigger. So that's sort of a UVIR kind of thing that you thought
you were going to go smaller. And instead, you're going bigger. And so you're starting to see that
basically, why the UVIR thing is so important is it means the death of reductionism,
of the kind of reductionism that I just talked about. Some people, when they hear me say this,
will say that they think I'm saying there's, it's the death of scientific explanation.
No, no, no, no. Scientific explanation is one thing. It's a broad class of theories.
Reductionism is just one kind of scientific explanation. That particular flavor of scientific
explanation, which is the, you know, the UV going to UV and getting smaller and smaller scales
and getting deeper and deeper entities and, and laws, that works up to a point and then it falls
apart. Our best theories tell us that. So that's why it's so important. I should mention another
reason why this whole thing is so important because it tells a beautiful story about how
science works. It's, I think, not really well understood. And here's the kind of misunderstanding
that can come up. I just said that Einstein and quantum theory assume that space time is fundamental
and they take that assumption and they try to build a mathematical model, right? So Einstein's
special and general relativity, quantum field theory, fields defined over space time. So they,
they take the idea that space time is fundamental. They make it mathematically precise.
But then their mathematics comes back and tells you that space time is not fundamental,
that space time is doomed. It doesn't even make sense beyond 10 to the minus 33 centimeters.
So here, so a lot of people will say, aha, well, we've caught physics in a, they've shot
themselves in the foot logically. And here's the logical problem. You assume to begin with that
space and time are fundamental or space time is fundamental. You then went ahead and took that
intuition and you put mathematics to it. Now, either your mathematics faithfully represents
that space time is fundamental or it doesn't. Suppose it does faithfully represent that space
time is fundamental. Well, then how in the world could it come back and tell you that it's not
fundamental? Surely that wouldn't happen. Okay, so forget that. So therefore, it must be that your
mathematics didn't faithfully represent your intuition. That space time is fundamental. And
if it didn't, then why could you even trust it to tell you that space time is not fundamental?
So you couldn't pot. So in other words, there's no way, according to this, this kind of logic,
without self contradiction, you couldn't use your, your physical as theories to show that
space time is not fundamental. So the, so the whole thing is, is, is just a self contradiction.
So that's the way, you know, some philosophers will argue about this kind of thing. And here's the,
the problem with that is very, first my simple, gee, how do you get out of that? I mean,
looks like you've really shot yourself in the foot. How do you get out of it? Sure.
It's quite simple. It completely misunderstands scientific theories. Scientific theories make
assumptions. And when you, when you write down a scientific theory, you know that your assumptions
are just assumptions. They're fallible. They're not the final word. And so what you do when you
write down a scientific theory is you try to get a mathematically precise statement of those
assumptions. And if you've done it right, your mathematics will itself tell you the limits
of your assumptions. And that's what you want. Because when, so the mathematics will tell you
the power of your assumptions, the area of application of your assumptions, what problems
they can solve. But the mathematics will also tell you the limits of your assumptions. And we know,
a priori, that there is no theory of everything. There isn't. There's all, there's only a theory
of everything except my assumptions. And you'll always have to get deeper and deeper assumptions.
And that's a never ending process. And so this is essential to how science moves forward.
At every step, you will take your intuitions, you'll put them to mathematics.
And then the mathematics will come back and tell you the limits of the intuitions, the assumptions
in your intuitions. If it's a good theory, if it's a bad theory, it'll just pat you on the back.
And, and, and you won't make any progress, right? You, what you want is a theory that comes back
and slaps you in the face and says, at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, precisely, your theory
ceases to make sense. It has no operational meaning. That's what you want. So, and the same thing has
come up with my theory about conscious, well, I have a theory in terms of using evolutionary game
theory to show that, that evolution shaped us not to see reality. So that, that space and time and
the notions of organisms and resources and competition for resources is not fundamental.
And the same argument has been used against that. People will say, look, okay, Darwinian evolution.
That assumes organisms in space and time competing.
Nature, red and tooth and claw for limited resources and mates and so forth. So either the
evolutionary game theory accurately modeled those intuitions, or it didn't. If it didn't
accurately model them, then you can't use it to disprove, you know, the fundamental nature of,
you know, organisms and space, time and resources and competition. And if it did
accurately model Darwin's ideas, then it couldn't possibly contradict Darwin's ideas. So you're,
so once again, you've shot yourself in the foot. And again, the answer is that completely misunderstands
the most elementary aspect of scientific theory building and progress. We want to, to get mathematical
models of our theories that show us the, the limitations of the fundamental assumptions
because they, they are necessarily going to mean that limitations. That's necessary
because there is no final theory of everything. And once you realize that, then the whole question
about this particular kind of shooting yourself in the foot goes out the window. Of course,
there are, there are ways to shoot yourself in the foot logically, but this isn't one of them.
Sure. Yeah. No, that's really great. I agree, I agree with you. The, I think one thing,
maybe we could just follow back on a little bit, because as, as you pointed out, I do think it's
a very powerful idea that the UV IR interaction, and it's not something that I think is in a,
a popular, you know, consciousness for very few people know about this, this dynamic that occurs.
But what I, what seems to happen is, so you have the, the ultraviolet, the, the smaller
higher energy scales you have infrared, the very large scales. And is it, is what happens,
is it kind of wraps around where the micro laws come back around to the macro laws, or
does it push back upward? Like, where is, if we had to think about it, if you had to
analyze it, how would you do it? Well, I would say that the physicists themselves are, are really
eagerly exploring that very kind of question, because it looks like there's a lot to it. The
mathematics suggests all sorts of UV IR interactions. So this is, I would say right now, a very hot
topic in, in, in physics, high energy physics research. So, so the one I mentioned about,
you know, as you try to go to smaller scales, you effectively are making a bigger black hole,
so you're going to larger. That, that's just one symptom. I think that there are going to be many,
many more UV IR correspondences. So, so I think that that's, that what I mentioned is just the tip
of a big iceberg. And the physicists themselves are just now beginning to really explore that,
that huge iceberg. So it's still a pretty big mystery. We don't really know, because I was
wondering if, like, I think about it in terms of, let's say you had UV at the floor, the ground
level, you have IR at the ceiling, let's say. So it's like, if you go in one direction or the other,
does it pop back around? Like, if you go through the ground, does it pop back up through the ceiling,
or instead does it, does it go through the, does it go back up? Does it bounce back? Or
does it wrap back around? If that makes sense. We don't know the right kinds of questions. And
we may, you know, our theory of consciousness outside of space-time may help, eventually,
in understanding this, because what we're saying is that the space-time itself is nothing but
a fairly trivial data structure. It's a four-dimensional, I mean, if it's string theory,
maybe 11 or 12-dimensional, whatever. But the dimensions of the dynamics of the
consciousness outside of space-time could be, you know, quadrillions of dimensions. I mean,
it's just the number of dimensions, and these are not dimensions curled up inside space-time,
like you think about in string theory, you think about these are small dimensions that are in some
sense inside space-time, curled up inside. Now, these are entirely beyond space-time,
entirely outside, and space-time itself is, you know, a relatively trivial data structure,
a user interface that, you know, systems of consciousness use to interact with each other.
And so that framework may be what we actually ultimately will need to understand this UVIR
back and forth of just space-time as merely a data structure, an interface that maybe the
framework we have to go to, that way we actually will see the limits of that data structure.
Yeah, one question I had, and also a commenter I'll have to find over the name of the commenter
and overlay it on the screen for this portion, because I can't remember who it was, but there's
a question about how the epithetodendron, which I believe it maps for particle scattering with its
volume, how does an object have volume outside of space and time? Well, so for example, think about
the volume of a square, a 5 by 5 square. Well, it's, let me say 5 inch by 5 inch,
but 5 units, whatever the units might be. Well, then it's 25, right, 5 times 5.
Okay, now go to a three-dimensional cube. So it's an object that has the same length
in three dimensions. Now, what is its volume? It's 5 times 5 times 5, which would be 125, right?
Well, now go to four dimensions. Well, that's 5 times 5. So it's 5 to the fourth.
Now go to six dimensions, 5 to the sixth and so forth. Now go to 10 dimensions, 5 to the 10th.
And so in each case, you can compute the volume, no problem. And all you're doing is you're,
you're, so the way to think about this is our ability to visualize as human beings
is pretty trivial. We can visualize in two dimensions, three dimensions, and it stops.
It's very easy for us to think that the pretty pathetic limitations of our intuitions
put a hard and fast limitation on the nature of reality. No, no, no, no, no. I would love
to be able to visualize in a thousand-dimensional space. I'm stuck with three, three piddling
dimensions. And I feel that limitation all the time. It's my limitation. It's not
a limitation on reality. It's a limitation on my paltry imagination. So where our,
our visualization abilities fall apart, at least we have enough visualization abilities to get the
picture. Oh, okay, a square five times five, five times five. Okay, four dimensions, it must be five
to the fourth. So we get the pattern and then we realize we can go up to three dimensions.
Reality goes limitless. Quadrillions of dimensions, Google dimensions,
and then infinite dimensions. So, so there, that's where mathematics is so powerful,
where we, our intuition stop at three, mathematics can go to infinity and beyond.
Right, absolutely. And staying in this, I mean, we're going to stay in the non-intuitive
kind of landscape for a little bit because I have a bunch of questions to ask you in the,
regarding the quantum, quantum space, a quantum realm, let's say, a quantum mechanics. And the
first is, so you get space time from your fuses of consciousness, your network of conscious agents,
and the quantum, everything is very not intuitive, you know, it's, it's outside our
regular comprehension. Does your theory of a network of conscious agents, does that
like lend itself towards explaining some quantum phenomena, like things like the delay choice,
quantum eraser experiment, like the really, the really strange stuff that were, we seem like
miles away from trying to understand or getting to understanding. Does, does it lend any credence
to that? Or does, does it help explain that? Are you finding any interesting early evidence there?
Right. So, so the answer is yes. And I should say that the physicists themselves, for example,
like Nima or Connie Ahmed, when they say that space time is doomed,
they're also saying that quantum theory is doomed. Yeah, both. That is not fundamental. And
that he, he says that he thinks that they will both arise, quote unquote, joined at the hip
from some deeper structure. And the idea is that, yes, I think that that's correct. And that we will
get not only space time, but quantum theory arising from as a projection of this theory of conscious
agents. Now, the weirdness of quantum theory is largely because I claim it's a projection. It's
not the full, the reason we have to use the amplitudes and, and, and do all the, the complicated
stuff in quantum theory. And we get things like entanglement and so forth is because quantum theory
is only giving you a mathematics of a projection of reality, not the full reality.
And, and so there's been some work even by quantum theorists showing that many of the properties
of quantum theory, and by the way, people who want to actually check on this, there's a paper by
Chris Fuchs, FUCHS, called Quantum Bayesianism. Oh yeah, I was going to ask you about that next.
Right. And, and he goes in and actually talks in that paper about many of the properties of
quantum theory that that are simply due to lack of information. And so it's no surprise if space
time is a projection of this deeper dynamics of conscious agents and that dynamics of conscious
agents could have countless dimensions and lots of things going on in space time has four dimensions.
And it's just a trivial projection. It's no surprise that most of the information is lost.
And so quantum theory really is the mathematics of how to deal with partial
knowledge when you've lost most of the knowledge through projection. And so that's what we're,
that's how I see this thing going. But, but yeah, of course, our, as I mentioned earlier on, we want
to first show that we can get the momentum distributions of the quarks and gluons inside
protons, but eventually mean ultimately we want to show that all of quantum theory
arises as a projection of this dynamics of conscious agents.
Yeah. Yeah, I was literally going to ask you next about Chris Fuchs, because he,
I mean, I see a lot of overlap between your theory and quantum Bayesian Bayesianism.
And especially because I was rereading your fusions of conscious paper. And as you point out a few
minutes ago, trying to make as few, that's the word, trying to make as few presumptions as possible
going into your theory, you make, you make only two, you posit that there are conscious experiences.
Seems very basic. I'm with you on that. I think most people would be anyone watching this.
I got to say you're having a conscious experience. So it's gonna be hard to debate that.
And then the second one is that there are probabilistic relations among conscious experiences.
That seems, yeah, sure, I'm with you there. And that seems to be
to overlap very highly with Cubism, which was just the shorthand for quantum Bayesianism.
And even Fuchs in a 2010 paper, he wrote this quote, I thought was great,
quantum mechanics is an addition to Bayesian probability theory,
not a generalization of it, not something orthogonal to it altogether, but in addition.
Which I thought was really interesting, because he's like layering out saying,
what's more fundamental? And it's this, this, this probability. And of course, probability
relations are, are core to your theory as well. So are there, can you, is there an overlap there?
Or can you compare contrast? Is there a difference? Yeah, I know Chris. Yeah, we were there together
at the Chapman University Conference and so forth. I've been trying to persuade him to
join our, join us and work with us on this stuff. But yeah, so there's a lot in principle that we
agree on. I don't know that he's, Chris in his paper of quantum Bayesianism
points out that, you know, the observer is really important, right, that quantum theory is basically
a story about how the observer takes track of the data and counts for their own data and,
and what they, so it's, but he says, I don't owe you a theory of the observer. I'm a physicist,
I don't owe you a theory of the observer. And of course, that's what I'm after here. I'm doing
that the theory of conscious agents is a theory of the observer. And I think ultimately,
without a theory of the observer, you'll not make progress. You really, that's what we're
saying. We're saying conscious agents, these agents are experiencers, they're, they're observers.
And it's only when you actually study the dynamics of observation that you're going to understand
how physics arises as a projection, you know, space-time physics arises as a projection of that.
It's just one of, one trivial projection out of countless other kinds of projections that you
could have. So, so, you know, Chris and I, you know, we're friends. I enjoy talking with them.
And I would love to have them collaborate. But we'll see. I mean, it's,
maybe if we get success on modeling quarks and gluons, we can rope Chris in to join us. Well,
we'll see. I like Chris. He's, he's, he's brilliant, of course. And, and, and we have enough differences
that is, that there's a good, it's a good interaction because there are differences. And
so that's what you want in a scientific collaboration, right? Sure. Absolutely. And the other,
a couple of other things on the quantum side before moving into some more non-physics territory in a
bit. The, that I wanted to ask you this one on our last conversation, the recent Nobel Prize winners.
So, Aspect, Klauser and Zellinger. If you could, did you mind just explicating for the audience
a little bit about, I mean, as a groundbreaking work over many decades, you know, they all had,
I was tracing out like, oh, this is decades apart, their, their work. And they found that this is
from Quanta, some wonderful publication for folks who are familiar with it. But they wrote, I think
the high level summary is that they found reality has no fixed and predetermined state until you
measure it. That's what they found. That's right. That's true of John Bell's. But would you, could
you give us like just a high level summary of that and, and I guess how it plays into your work?
So, so yes, the, the, the recent Nobel Prize last December was for the experimental
test of the prediction of quantum theory that local realism is false. So local realism has two
parts. One is locality, which says that particles have properties that whose influences propagate
no faster than the speed of light. So properties, the influences can't, you know, there's a speed
limit on the universe and you can't exceed that, at least for information transfer. And the, and
that's locality. Realism is the, the claim that particles have definite values of their properties
even when they're not observed, like position, momentum and spin. And Einstein was famous for his,
you know, support for realism. He said that, you know, if without disturbing a system, you can predict
with probability one, the value of a property, then that, then that value of the property
really does exist and it really did exist, right? That's, that's realism. And most people would side
with Einstein. Of course, right? You can predict with probability one before you measure without
disturbing it, what, what the value is, then the value did exist before. And it really is real. And,
and so, so, so most of our intuitions would line up with Einstein that realism is true. But
quantum theory says, no, local realism is false. And that's what the,
the Nobel Prize for over several decades, you know, starting in Clouser and
Aspect and then Zeilinger, the over decades, these guys did the test and then closed loopholes in
the previous test and then closed more loopholes because this is such a big one. I mean, our intuitions
are so much against local realism being false. We believe local realism. We believe realism.
That, that they really needed to go to all sorts of links to close any possible loopholes. And,
and so it's just plain false that particles have definite values of properties when they're not
observed. And by the way, Chris Fuchs paper, again, the quantum basing paper, gives an example.
He, if you, so people want to see, you can see an actual quantum example
that that, that, that he goes through, it's not Fuchs example of, you know, himself, he's quoting
and explaining some other work by their physicists. But, but Fuchs, Fuchs paper is a great place to
do it because he gives a good explanation. A quantum setup where you can know with probability one,
what value you will get when you make a particular measurement, but you can prove using quantum
theory and that particular experimental setup that it's impossible for the value to exist prior to
you making the measurement. So you, so Einstein was wrong. Here's a quantum system where you know
with probability one, what you're going to get without disturbing the system when you measure
without disturbing system, you know, with probability one, what the value is that you're
going to get when you do measure the system. And you can prove that that value does not exist
prior to the measurement. So, so that's the real kicker is that that the act of observation
is not an act of fact discovery. It's an act of fact creation, which is the kind of
thing that John Wheeler would like to say, the, you know, the act of observation is an act of
a fact creation. And, and that's what the, the theory of consciousness is saying as well that
the coin of the realm are conscious experiences. And that's, and that's what's happening is we're,
we're, you know, the fundamental reality are these conscious experiences that arise and disappear.
And space time itself is just a user interface. One possible out of many, many countless
other possible interfaces that we could use to interact with the other conscious agents.
You know, I'm looking forward once we kneel down in relationship with
space time to then start to explore all, all the other kinds of interfaces that are possible.
Space time is, is not the only one and it may not be a particularly interesting one. It may be
I think, probably trivial one. I think we got saddled with a cheap model.
Maybe it was the best we could afford, Don. I think that there are conscious agents out there
with interfaces where they can understand, they can, they can imagine 50,000 dimensions. And I,
I'm jealous. Yeah. At least we're not stuck in one dimension or one in the, like the second
dimension, you know, flat land. I was going to ask you like maybe E. Coli, maybe, maybe E. Coli only
Yeah, who knows what their perceptual experience is like. The, I wanted to ask you,
next was going to be about John Wheeler and has it from Bit, the participatory universe that he,
that he posited. Does that, I mean, I know that's, you know, it's, that's an idea that decades old
and it's not such a popular idea anymore. Or what, I don't know if it ever really caught on.
Um, he had some pretty out there ideas like the one electron universe and everything, but,
but it from bit in particular, the participatory nature of things that seems fairly similar to
what you're, what you're proposing here, right? Is there any tie with, with your theory?
I, I agree with you. And, uh, I think Wheeler agreed. He actually cited me. And is it from
bit paper? Oh, I didn't realize that. Wow. Yeah. 1989. Wow. I, um, with, with, uh, Bruce Bennett
and Chaitan Prakash, we published a book called Observer Mechanics in 1989. And it, it 300 pages
of math, which was our first attempt at this theory of conscious agents. And Wheeler cites it
in his it from bit paper. I think it's like reference 170, 175 or something like that.
So if you want to see it, it's Bennett, Hoffman, Prakash, and he cites. So he'd actually seen our,
our book. And, uh, we, in fact, in our book, use the notion of a participator as the technical
term. And we got that from Wheeler, right? So we, we, we chose the term participator,
which was sort of our, our, our name for conscious agents in that book.
Gotcha.
conscious agents were, we called them participators. We had a more coding dynamics of
participators. So, so yes, we were influenced in our 1989 book by Wheeler's ideas, at least
for the language that we used. Um, and then Wheeler was, had clearly looked at our book and,
and liked it enough to cite it in his it from bit paper. So, and I think a lot of physicists
like Wheeler's idea, but don't know what to do with it. Right? I mean, Wheeler,
it's the kind of thing where you go, there's, there's, he's onto something and he's, he's a genius
and he was, everybody understood. He was, you know, a physicist genius and, you know,
very famous physicists were his students. Feynman was a student of Wheeler's and so forth. So,
uh, he was nobody's fool. That's for sure. He was, he was brilliant. You can't dismiss him out of
hand. It was, I think a lot of physicists think that, you know, there may be something deep there,
but, but you know, science has to, you know, physics has to catch up. We have to get to the
point where we can, you know, put beef on the idea that, that Wheeler saw and hopefully the
theory of conscious agents may be a step in that direction. Gotcha. That's great. And then the last
physics piece before we jump into some non-physics stuff, Seth Lloyd and his ontology of qubits and
gates, which I know you've referenced in at least one of your papers before, you know, you were
pursuing a different ontology than his, but I don't know if you, if you followed his work
in that space at all, but it also seems similar in some respect to sort of like Wolfram's work
with the computational sort of digital universe concept and ideas. But do you have any comments
about Seth Lloyd's work or if that has any overlap with, with what you're working on?
Well, there, there is a way in which they're similar and a way in which they're very, very
different. So the similarity is that they're not taking space time as fundamental. They're
trying to build it up. Right. So that, but Seth Lloyd is using, trying to start with quantum
theory and build it up for quantum bits and quantum gates. And it's brilliant, brilliant work.
But on that, I, I think that Nima or Connie Hamed is right that, that, that we,
starting with quantum theory is not going deep enough. We're going to have to find a deeper
framework entirely outside of space time and quantum theory and show that space time and
quantum theory together arise joined at the hip. So I, I agree with Nima on that. And part of it is
that, that quantum theory, at least the evolution like the Schrodinger equation
has time as a parameter. So it's, it's, so space time is doomed. That version of quantum theory is
doomed too. It's not fundamental. We're going to have to get something, something deeper. So,
so, you know, of course, I think in science, we need to let a thousand flowers grow. So I, I wouldn't
try to stop their work at one bit. I would encourage their work. I should, I would say it
should be funded. And, and, and, and also the work was trying to show some kind of automata,
maybe some kind of cellular automata or something like that, at the foundations of space time. But
if, if the idea is that, that, that space time is fundamental, and these are just like the,
the building blocks of space time, then I think it's not going deep enough. I think we, we really
need to let go of our clinging to space time and view it for what I think it is, which is merely a
user interface. That is, it's, there's a deeper dynamical reality utterly beyond space time. And
that space time is, is one of countless interfaces that that dynamical reality can use to interact
with itself. Yeah. So, so that's, I think the difference. So in spirit, they're trying to
get at the foundations with, with Seth Lloyd is really trying to use quantum theory to boot up
space time. And, and in other cases, you know, might be various kinds of automata.
And I guess, you know, in some sense, there is probably some kind of mathematical map between
our probabilistic Markovian dynamics of conscious agents and automata. And for example, our, our,
it's as easy to prove that the Markovian dynamics is computationally universal.
So anything that you can do with automata, you can do, or with Turing machines, universal Turing
machines, or neural networks, you can do with Markovian dynamical systems. So they're computationally
universal. But there's another aspect to it. And that is that the Markovian dynamical systems
are not limited to computation. In particular, the measurable spaces and the measurable sets on
which the probabilities are defined need not be computable. They could not be recursively
neural. There's, as far as I can see, there's no reason to restrict the definition of probabilities
to our resets. So if that's right, then, then Markovian dynamics is not restricted to
computer computability. Of course, it gets computability trivially.
And that's one reason why we felt comfortable in our, in our basic definition of conscious agents
to have it be so trivial. I mean, there are, there are conscious experiences,
and they have dynamical interactions with them. So we, what didn't we put in? We didn't put in a
notion of a self. We didn't put in notions of learning, memory, problem solving, attention,
none of that. But we knew that since networks of conscious agents are computationally universal,
that any, anything that you could build a neural network of, so neural network of learning and
memory and intelligence, you know, like chat, GPT and so forth, anything that you can do with
those networks, you can do with conscious agent networks were computationally universal. So
that's why we didn't want to put the kitchen sink into our definition. We wanted to make our
definition is absolutely spare as possible while retaining computational universality
so that we could then build everything else and we'd be forced to build everything else.
And so, so that was why that was our choice. And that's what you want. That's, that's Occam's razor
right in the building of scientific theories is minimal set of assumptions as possible.
And that's so yeah. Yeah, that's great. And before we kept off the sort of physics related
kind of questions, truncated a comment or question from carbon 1479. They asked,
I'm truncating it a bit here, but does your model lead towards an eternal block universe
or multiverse? No. No, okay. So the like the Einstein block universe where he's space time,
there's a space time flow from and no, it doesn't lead to that kind of universe at all.
In fact, it says that that the space time itself is one trivial, fairly trivial kind
of interface that networks of consciousness can use. As I said earlier, it's the cheap model.
It's a I think it's a cheap model. So even the interface isn't a block universe, even the
even even the yeah, even our interface version is not a block universe by any means.
Here, here's one way that could be concrete about why it's not time.
Time is not fundamental in our Markovian dynamics. You might say, wait a minute,
you're talking about Markovian dynamics. Now, dynamics sounds like you have some notion of time.
And there is a notion of sequence in the Markovian dynamics. But time as physicists think about it
is intimately linked with the second law of thermodynamics, which says that entropy is
always increasing in some sense, that law gives the arrow to time, the direction to time. And
with our Markovian dynamics of conscious agents, there is a step sequence, but it's
straightforward to write down Markovian dynamics in which the entropy does not increase.
It's a constant entropy. But it's also trivial. It's a three step proof to show that if you take
such a Markovian dynamics in which there is no arrow of time, so there's no physics time at all
in it. Any projection of that dynamics, so you're taking this Markovian dynamics and you're projecting
it to another dynamics where you've lost information. So it's another Markovian dynamics
which is a projection of the deeper one. So it's a projected dynamics, but it's lost information.
The very act of losing information in the projection entails that you will have
an increasing entropy in the projected dynamics. So you will have an arrow of time in that
projected dynamics, not as an insight into the original dynamics. It's an artifact of the projection.
And so the entropic arrow of time that is the foundation of, for example, the spacetime cube
is not an insight into this deeper reality. It's a trivial artifact of the projection process.
It's something that happens, quote unquote, like a mistake of the projection. It's entailed
by the projection. It's not a deep insight into the deeper reality. So that's a good question.
But you can see that why we're definitely not just the spacetime cube and even the time part
of that cube, we're saying is an artifact of projection, that that arrow, the notion of an
arrow of time that would allow you to trace out the cube. Of course, the cube itself now is this
spacetime loaf in which in some sense you're seeing all of time at once. But there is an arrow
nevertheless in that loaf. And that arrow is an artifact of the projection process.
So in the original, not yet projected space, let's talk about space is already throwing
it off a bit. But let's say in that realm, if there is a sequence, there's no time there.
But how does the sequence play out? Or how do you get the orderedness of it? I mean,
is that is the block? That seems to me like a block universe, but that seems to me like a block
space sort of in that these sequences exist, but no time. So how does that how's that ordered?
Right. So in the theory of Markov change, you do get these
ordered spaces where you look at all possible trajectories that the dynamics could take.
And those typically denoted by a capital omega. So often that the spaces are written and then
individual trajectories are a little omega. So you have all these little omegas that are possible
trajectories and together all of them make up the big omega. And these are infinitely long
trajectories and so forth. And then once you put a probability measure on these trajectories,
you can then see whether that particular more COVID dynamics has a growing entropy or not
on that. But but it turns out you don't need to have a growing entropy and therefore you don't
need to have a physics kind of notion of time at all. So there is a notion of sequence, an order.
So you have a total. So here's the thing. You have a total ordered set of steps. So there's a
total order, but but that's time has more structure than that. It's got a growing entropy and so
forth. Time in modern physics is subject to Lorentz transformations and the whole bit.
What we want to like to show is that here we have this Markovian dynamics. There need to be no
arrow of time because there's no increasing entropy. And we can show that under certain
projections, yeah, it looks like a Lorentz transformation. So for example, the projections
might be various kinds. If I have a big Markov chain, there you can do so called trace chains.
You could do various projections onto different traces of subsets of states or maybe even
subsamples of steps. And what this is one direction I'm really interested in pursuing is to show that
under what conditions of the tracing and sampling that all the different traces and samples are
related to each other by, for example, the Lorentz group or the Poincare group, so that we can
actually show where those symmetries come from as just one way of getting a family of projections,
a group of projections of this deeper dynamics of consciousness. Interesting, cool.
When you take a sampling, and this is another comment or question I have to find their name
and overlay it, but when you take a sampling, let's say of the largest group or the total group,
is there a fractal-like quality to a smaller sampling set? I think they mentioned that you
did an interview at some point, I mean, you mentioned that there was some kind of like
self-similar, some self-similarity between say a sampling of a space and say the omega,
the totally large space. Is that ringing any bells or is this totally off?
Well, it's a pretty interesting direction to think about. The
there's the notion of self-similarity. Well, first, if we have this big
consciousness dynamics, you might get trace chains of it that are similar in various
ways to the to the original, certainly. But there's something very, very deep about,
well, I'll just put it this way. First, yeah, straightforward to get self-similarity. You
can do that with Markov Dynamics, but there's something really, there's something even deeper,
and there's something that physicists and scientists call universality. This was discovered by
Eugene Wigner working on the Manhattan Project and trying to get the energy levels of the
uranium atom, which are so complicated he couldn't get it. So what he did was he
used large random matrices, just matrices of random numbers. And he showed that the,
he found that the eigenvalues, so the eigenvalues are a way of characterizing the intrinsic properties
of a matrix. And you could have lots and lots of eigenvalues and they'd be spaced. You could have,
maybe an eigenvalue would be close to one, another eigenvalue, but the spacing,
they wouldn't get too close and they wouldn't get too far away. And you got this distribution of
the spacing between the eigenvalues. And this has shown up all, he discovered that and it seemed to
match the spacing of energy levels of the uranium atom. And then this whole thing about
universality, you mentioned the magazine, Quanta. Quanta Magazine has wonderful videos and articles
on universality. So if you just Google Quanta Magazine and universality, there's a fun world to
enter through Quanta Magazine on that. But our Markov Dynamics, we have these,
a Markov kernel is a matrix. It's an end-by-end matrix. It could be a billion-by-billion. And
many of the matrices that we're going to study are random. They're random numbers where the
numbers are between zero and one. It doesn't matter what the range of the numbers is, the random
numbers. So universality is going to pop out of this where we're dealing with just random matrices.
And so I'm right now just, and that has to do with like phase transitions. So how do you go from
one, for example, state of matter to another phase transitions all? So I'm, that question is good
because it's pointing to a huge realm of research that I'm really eager to jump into. Yeah, there's
a notion of self-similarity, but then there's this whole universality thing. And it's really
deeply tied somehow to random matrices. And matrices are the foundation of this theory of
conscious agents. And many of them are going to be random. Many of them will not be random too.
So it's going to be really interesting to explore. So yeah, we get fractal kind of behavior. We also
get behavior that's very deterministic, right? You can model both. So you don't necessarily have
to get fractal behavior in a Markov chain, but you absolutely can. And you can get universality as
well. So it's a very, very flexible framework. And I'm very eager to, to explore. I may need to have
some other experts who are more expert on the math, you know, the mathematics here is pretty intense.
Yeah, there's a lot of different areas that you jump in between. I spoke with Carl Friston
a few weeks ago and talked about his free energy principle. And I was wondering,
because one of the things he mentioned to me in our conversation was, his quote was, there's,
it doesn't know of anything that's more fundamental than the free energy principle.
So, you know, trying to, trying to minimize, I think it's a variational free energy in a system,
you know, anything, any agent in a system is trying to do that. Do you find, have you found
any of those kinds, that kind of dynamic from your conscious agent framework? Are they exhibiting
this kind of behavior? But do they abide by the free energy principle?
Right. So in, in the theory of Markov chains, what you, you're going to get very, very similar
kinds of things popping out. There's something called potential theory. In, in, in, so you're
going to have is systems in which you can model what would look like heat. So the free energy,
the Gibbs free energy, for example, is the enthalpy minus delta, so, so the, the delta G,
you know, the change in the Gibbs free energy equals delta H, which is the change in the enthalpy
minus T delta S, which is T is the temperature and degrees Kelvin, and delta S is the change
in the entropy. So, so what I see happening is that these are going to be high level descriptions
of when we actually look at Markov chains, you're going to find that they're, you have this
dynamics is happening in a, in a large dimensional space, and certain states are going to have
higher probabilities. You're going to be in some sense more, the dynamics will be more attracted
to those states. And then, and then less attracted to be put somewhere else, it'll, it'll tend to,
to converge to certain kinds of states. And so we're going to be able to model all, you know,
absolutely Gibbs free, free energy, enthalpy, entropy, the whole bit within the Markovian
dynamics. Now, one thing that I'll mention that, that may be a difference in, in our frameworks,
you know, I think that the Gibbs free energy ideas is, is important and, and should be pursued.
But typically, the work that they're doing is assuming
it was built on the work of Judea Pearl, directed acyclic graphs.
Markov chains are more general.
Directed acyclic graphs are a special kind, a special subclass of Markov. But there's no reason
not to have cycles. Why, why should it be acyclic? Lots of things in nature are, are cyclic. And so
the, the Markovian dynamics that we're, we're studying, of course, can model directed acyclic
graphs as a special case. There are special Markov chains that do that, but it is not restricted to
that. And so that's, that's going to be one difference. Another important thing is that
in, in some cases, it, in the discussions, it seems like some of the proponents of the, you know,
free energy principle are thinking that the, there's with the directed acyclic graph and the
free energy principle, you have what's called a Markov blanket, right? There's the, the states of
the system inside, then there's the external world, and then there's a blanket. And so if you have a
set of nodes that are your system, the blanket is technically defined as all the parents of the
nodes in your system, all the descendants of the nodes of your system, and all the parents
of the descendants of the nodes in your system, that those, those are, those nodes form the Markov
blanket. This is from Judea Pearl's work and for directed acyclic graphs. Now it, it's a theorem
that the state of the nodes inside the blanket and the state of the nodes of the rest of the world
outside of the blanket are conditionally independent, entirely conditionally independent, given the
state of the nodes of the Markov blanket. What that means is the only thing that the nodes inside
can know about quote, unquote, the world is captured on the blanket. And it's trivial to show that
there are, there's an infinity of different states of the external nodes that would lead to exactly
the same state of the blanket nodes, right? Given, right? So you could have tons and tons of states.
So the Markov blanket is what we call an interface in our theory, right? It's,
it's an interface. And there's no way that the, so often in many cases there, they talk in this
literature as though you are doing Bayesian inference and actually inferring the true state of the
external world. That's not possible. The state of the nodes outside the blanket and the state of
the nodes inside the blanket are conditionally independent, given the state of the blanket.
So there's no way. So all you can do, you can never get a Bayesian estimate of the true state of the
external world. You can't. All you can do is get your best interface description. So the way I think
about the free energy principle, I think is a little bit different than many of the proponents of
the, of that free energy principle. It's, you're, you're not doing Bayesian inference and getting
an estimate of the true state of the world, not by a long shot. You are simply getting a user
interface that allows you to stay alive as a system. But the staying alive as a system doesn't
mean that you've actually estimated the truth about the external world. So there may be a difference
in philosophy that would be fun to discuss. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting. It's still,
I talked with him for a while and I've researched it fully. It's, it's still
aspects of it that elude me, if I'm being honest, that the, I'm not sure what's sort of intrinsic
and what's sort of a byproduct and what's, you know, what's sort of naturally happening there.
So it's something that I have to, I have to keep following back. There was a great
set of papers in behavioral and brain science a few years back that I can point you to where
they, there's a target article that argues that, that, you know, the free energy principle is
it's used and the notion of Markov blankets is this used
is different from that of Pearl, that Pearl gave a functional definition and in many cases
look like they were giving a physical definition of the boundary. I think since then a lot of
working free energy principles sort of walk back the idea of identification with a physical
principle. But, but I think there's still a very interesting dialogue going back and forth. I think
the, I think that Gibbs free energy is of course central and it's very, very important.
Exactly how it's being used is really critical. My take is,
as long as we're still thinking inside space time, we're not thinking deep enough.
We're going to find that when you analyze the potential theory of Markov chains and so forth,
you will get all, you'll get Gibbs free energy and all those concepts entirely outside of space
time. And then when we look down to space time as a user interface as a trivial projection of
that deeper thing, we will then see the physics notion of Gibbs free energy and chemistry notion
of Gibbs free energy and so forth as a projection of this much deeper notion of the
potential theory of Markov chains. So that's my take of where it's going.
I want to ask you about in a commenter. I have to find the names of these commenters. I have,
I know it's all over the place, but I know there was a commenter who posited something around how
how do you know, and I guess I would assume it's just the best we can do, but
like math and formal logic, how do we know it's not just another symbol within our interface,
i.e., how can we be sure, sure with enough confidence that outside of this interface,
say outside space and time, that they say hold true, because like one plus one equals two,
you know, we know that's true here, but how do we know it's true outside our universe or in
another universe or, you know, all the way all the way outside of that. So do you have anything?
I mean, it's just something you think about, you've thought about, but you respond to that in
any way? Well, there's several levels of, it's an important question, and there's several levels.
Maybe the simplest level would be if you just have the notion of, for example,
the kinds of basic kinds of geometries we could have of spacetime. Is it flat?
Is it hyperbolic or positive or negative curvature space?
And so we can use this mathematical notion of the geometry to ask the question, well,
what geometry does our universe have? And what we find is what using the cosmic microwave background
radiation, we've been able to say to within a certain level of certainty, our universe has is
flat, it has zero curvature, it's not positive or negative, it's zero. And we can put limits on,
if it's positive curvature, we can put limits on how big it could possibly be. So we can actually
say, okay, I mean, our data are, you know, suggested it's flat, but they don't rule out
a small curvature, because of course noise and so forth, you can't rule it out. So given what
we know about the noise, and even though it's pointed to zero, it might not be exactly zero,
we can put a limit on the positive curvature in there, and therefore the positive
diameter of our universe. And so that's been done. So that's one way, and you can see,
here we're using geometry, the mathematics, the abstract mathematics to constrain
using data, our understanding of the geometry of the universe we happen to be living in.
Okay, so that's one way of getting up. But, but there's a deeper now, there's a deeper, the, the,
I think the questioner is asking a deeper question, which is why should we trust mathematics at all?
And these are the mathematics that we're using.
It's not, it's not the final word, by any means. And I would say, yeah, I agree that
mathematics is this powerful tool, but we have to be extremely aware that what humans have
discovered of mathematics is trivial. I would say if all the mathematics that is to be known,
we know probability zero of it. We know measure zero of the mathematics to be discovered.
And, and we know that there are many different axiom systems that are that that we can use.
And so it's now one way that some people have responded to this kind of thing though, for
example, like Max Tegmark, is to say, well, that just means to him, he thinks mathematics
is fundamental reality. And that doesn't just mean the mathematics that we now understand,
that's all the mathematics. And so for any possible kind of mathematical system, there's a
universe. And so he, I think he calls it his level four multiverse, where anything that's
mathematically possible, including stuff that we haven't discovered yet, is actual, and all those
universes exist. Now, but there's another answer to this as well, which is to say,
if we're going to reason at all, if we want to argue, we want to have differences of opinions
and try to convince each other, we're using logic. Or if we don't have that, what do we have?
Force, I mean, I'll force you to agree with me. Who's interested in that? So we use logic,
we use reason, we try to use evidence. The more precise your reasoning, the more you're really
moving into mathematics, the less precise, the more your reasoning is probably not worth listening to.
So we're in this real interesting catch 22. We can't,
we know that the mathematics we know is trivial compared to what's out there to be known. We
know that there are many different axiom systems that are mutually incompatible, and all are
interesting. So there is this, and yet, we don't want to say, we shouldn't use persuasion and
reason and logic in our discussions on politics and religion or whatever, or in science, or in
social studies, or in arts and humanities. We see reason and logic and argumentation,
like intelligent argumentation going on. And that certainly is far better than just brute force
saying, believe me, you must do it my way, you must assert and state what I, we don't want to do
there. So we're in an interesting position where it's humbling. If we don't use
math and logic, we're screwed. If we do use math and logic, we can't prove that we're using the
right stuff and we don't know what's out there that we don't know. So my attitude is,
we have to go with what we have so far and always be humble. Say, my theory is just the best theory
I have so far. And of course, it's just a theory. And of course, sooner, hopefully, then later,
people will look back and laugh at our theories. We look back at the, we look back a few centuries,
and we see the confident pronunciations of people. That's embarrassing. It's completely,
earth, air, fire, and water, that's not it. You know, caloric, that's not it. And even Newtonian
theory, it's beautiful, that's not it. And the same thing will be true of quantum theory and
spacetime. That's not it. And those who, it's really, if we don't want to embarrass ourselves,
we should be the ones that are saying about our own theories. Of course, this is just the next
baby step. If we don't have that attitude, we will look very, very silly in short order,
hopefully shorter, sooner than later. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I mean, the response I think is basically,
and I don't think this person commenting was critical. They were just curious,
but it would be like, well, what do you have that's better? What do you have that's better than
math and formal logic? It's like, if you have something that's better, let me know,
because we'll try to use it. But it's hard to, yeah, it's the best we can do is what we have
available. But I do think I want to turn to, and perhaps we could close in this kind of area, is
personal experience as a teacher. Because I do think, well, you know, each of our
individual life stories and our own personal experiences, those are
as true, as close to real as we can get, perhaps, or as the life force, the day-to-day
living that we do. And one thing that I think we mentioned this on this interview,
earlier rounds is your meditation practice. You spend upwards three hours a day, most days
meditating. And I'd love to hear more about that, because when I've heard you talk about
your practice, it's quite fascinating to me. How did you land on that practice? Did you try
out a bunch of different forms? How did you find what works for you?
Well, I should say that I got into it simply because I was having a hard time sleeping,
and so I didn't want to take pills. And so I decided to meditate. So it wasn't like some
deep... My guess is that if I hadn't had trouble sleeping, I wouldn't have ever meditated. And
I'm glad that I've meditated, because it turned out to be far more than just a sleep aid. It has
transformed me in many, many ways. I was helped because I had a friend, Joe Arpaia, who had written
a book on meditation with, I guess, a forward by the Dalai Lama as well. And I had actually...
He had asked me to read and give him comments on a draft before he published it. And I wasn't
myself interested in meditation. I didn't do it, but Joe was a friend and a good friend, and
still is a very, very good friend. And so I gave him comments. So I had some understanding,
a little bit of understanding, just from reading of the Buddhist approach to it.
And then I read a little bit of a guy named Thomas Keating, who was a
Benedictine monk. So that's from a Christian Catholic kind of perspective. But then,
he also had lots of influence from Buddhism as well. So I saw that there was these mystical
aspects of Christianity and Buddhism were not that far apart. I mean, they used different
languages. The Buddhists aren't that terribly interested in Mother Mary, whereas Father Keating
was. As far as the practice was concerned, they didn't really affect the practice. And so my practice,
and then I'd say I've been heavily influenced as well by Eckhart Tolle. I think that his
is a fairly non-religious explication. And I really like that, a very non-religious explication of
meditation and very, very practical. And then you're not trying to get anywhere.
You're either present now or you're not. And there's no issue about getting good at meditation
or anything like that. It's am I present now? If not, why not get present? Be present now.
And there's nothing about having to use decades and decades of effort to finally get enlightened
and so forth. So I've really been helped by Eckhart's thing, because the mind naturally
tries to get into this thing where I try really hard. And if I try real hard and do all these
hours, then I will get enlightened eventually. The reason I have to spend so much time is
my guess is that I just have a lot of issues, a lot of emotional issues. And so I just have to be
there and face this stuff. And what Eckhart Tolle had called the pain body, I think I was born.
I know from the stuff my parents were dealing with before I was born, they were in deep,
deep emotional pain. And I was born into that. And so we each get a deck of cards that we're
dealt with. And I came into the world kicking and screaming. I cried non-stop for my first year,
basically. I was just born that way and gave my parents tremendous difficulty.
So and I'm still facing, probably, we know that a child born to a mother who is highly stressed
gets methylated in certain ways. You have change to your genetics. And so I suspect that I was born
into this world screaming and crying because I was methylated. My mom was very anxious. My parents
were very anxious. My dad was in the military. They were only 21 years old, 22 years old. They were
little kids scared to death, well, alcohol abuse and their families and so forth. They were just
trying to get their act together. So their stress gets taken into the child, methylation.
If your parents are stressed, it makes good evolutionary sense that you would methylate
the child to be ready for stressful situations. So I came ready to deal with stress. I was stressed
out all so hyper vigilant and so forth. And so my guess is that the reason I have to spend so much
time is I'm dealing with methylation. Literally, it's a biological, you know, from that point of
view, it's a biological thing. And so the unwinding of that is I've been at it for 30,000 hours of
meditation. And other people get born to parents who are calm and never get methylated in this way.
And so it's a different, you know, I would say that, you know, I got the cards I was dealt with,
people get different cards. It's been painful, but I've learned a lot. And, you know, so I'm not
complaining about it. Those are my cards. And I've learned to, you know, more and more be with what
is. And in some sense, the bigger the challenge you face, the more you learn. And this has been a
huge challenge for me. I mean, having to spend several hours a day just facing that and almost
like looking at this little child that's that's inconsolable and just being there and consoling
them and staying with it. So I've learned a lot in the process. And I think it's fed into my work
on consciousness because I'm really facing, you know, very personal level, this, this whole thing
about consciousness. My own take is our theory of conscious agents has a theorem. It's a theorem
with a theory that there is just ultimately one conscious agent. There is one. And all
conscious agents are projections, traces of that one conscious agent. And so, and that but but
it's also a theorem of the theory that that we can never get a complete mathematical description
by a long shot of that one conversation. It trend. So our mathematics says it exists. And it says you
can't actually describe it. It's it transcends mathematics. We can't do it. You'd have to climb
up all of something called Cantor's hierarchy and there's no end to Cantor's hierarchy of
infinities. So you could never get to that that that final description. But my own personal view
is that you and I and each person that I meet and in an amoeba and my cat.
I'm actually, each of us is the one that that that in other words, that that infinite
consciousness that transcends any mathematical description, looking at itself
through a particular little interface. And so I'm the way I view it right now is that, you know,
I'm talking with Carlos, but it's really the one talking with one. It's the one using a
it's the one using a Hoffman avatar talking with the one using the Carlos avatar. And it's it's
it's doing this for very, very deep reasons. In some sense,
the one which transcends any experience plunges itself into particular experiences. And
thereby gets to know itself better. But that's that's a few words for something I think is
extremely deep. A system can never know itself completely. You can't ever know yourself completely.
But in meditation, when you sit in silence without any thought, and you literally,
when you really let go of all thoughts, and you just are you, you just be,
then you are really and fully the one looking through this particular little window.
This particular little interface, but you are the one. And you're not separate from that. That's
that's what you are. When you get caught up in your ideas, your thoughts, and get lost in them,
and criticism, and comparing with other people, and, and identifying yourself with, you know,
Oh, I got this car, I got this house, or I'm on this smart, or I'm this stupid, or whatever. All
these things, then you're still the one, but you've got to cover it up with all these thoughts that
hiding your true identity from yourself. And somehow that seems to be also a necessary part
of the whole thing of the one going to sleep, and then waking up, deciding to really plunge
yourself into this particular little interface. As I've said, I think space time is a pretty
trivial little interface, but you know, the one chooses this, it probably has thousands and
trillions, countless other interfaces that it plunges into, and learn something new about it.
It's inexhaustible. The one is inexhaustible, and the exploration is inexhaustible. And so,
in some sense, what you learn in meditation is the attitude of
Yes, to whatever comes. Yes, not resistance, not letting go of fear. And that's what life may be
about, which is being open to whatever comes, and being open to learn, no matter what happens,
and not crawling back into our shells and complaining and whining. When we look at little
children, you look at an infant, a 15-month-old, and mom says, you know, it's time for us to
leave the swimming pool now, or it's time for us to get out of the sandbox, and the child breaks down
and cries, and you realize, wow, you understand what the child is doing, but you also understand
that's a lot of pain that the child is going through. And if they just understood that mom and
dad, in the healthy cases, loves them, and there's other fun stuff that's going to happen,
and just went with it, life could be a lot better. And so, I think that anytime I find myself
saying no to this moment, complaining in any way, I'm the little child in the sandbox
that's unnecessarily causing myself grief. So what meditation really teaches you is you are the one,
everything's going to be fine, even death, and you've got to, you're here for the ride and enjoy
the ride, be open to whatever comes on the ride, and that's easier said than done. That's why I
spend three hours a day in meditation. So I'm not saying this as someone who's there, I'm saying it
as someone who needs three hours a day to open up to the ride. And I'm good with that too.
That means, as I said, that was my deck of cards. Other people, like Eckhart Tolle,
it happened overnight. And I could wish that happened to me, but that's not me. That's him.
And so the one does, it has, tries on all sorts of different avatars, and it's all part of learning
about itself. So it's a long answer to the question, but I think that it does feed in to my research.
And in fact, I would say this, that the best ideas I have in research come after,
you have to do your reading, after your homework, of course, you have to, there's no substitute for
that. But then if you want the really good ideas, go into silence. The real creativity comes when
I let go of all thinking and just go into absolute silence, interior silence. That's
where the best ideas come from. Yeah. Do you have any advice for people? Let's say there's
viewers out there, they don't have, they don't have a meditation practice, but they've been
considering it or they're thinking about starting one. Do you have any tips or advice for people,
maybe starting out? My advice, again, I'm thinking about people sort of like me,
that may not want to be heavily invested in any particular religion. We'd like to have
something that's just practical, that's helpful, but maybe you don't have to buy into a bunch of
other stuff. For that, I would say Eckhart Tolle, his book The Power of Now and
New Earth, those are fabulous books. I've read them and reread them. I've gone through them
multiple times and he has a number of audio tapes that you can use audio books or audio
lectures he's given and I find them extremely helpful to listen to. Rather than me giving
advice, I would suggest here's the dude that's really helped me a lot. I've listened to all
of stuff. I don't detect any nonsense. I detect a genuine person. Now, I know that I say this to
some people and some people say, well, no, you really need to do this more advanced
Buddhist thing or whatever and that's perfectly fine, but I think for many American, many
non-religious people, the approach that Eckhart gives is going to be the most easily understood
and used, but of course, there are Zen approaches. There are every mystical tradition, Sufism,
mystical Christianity, Hinduism and all the mystical traditions. I'm not pushing any
particular religion at all. When you look at the mystical side of each of the religions,
Judaism as well, they all are pointing in the same direction, fallibly, but genuinely pointing
in that direction of going into, ultimately, it comes down to letting go of thought.
Literally, entire silence, interior silence, no thought at all. So the thought isn't your
master. I use thought, of course, as a scientist. I'm talking with you. I'm using thought,
but there's a time where you say, okay, it's time to stop thinking all together and just be
and just to spend a few minutes or a few hours and then have it actually be the habit instead of
going through the day sort of lost in thought because most of the thoughts that we have
just going through the day, when you look at them, they're completely dysfunctional.
They're useless and many of them are painful. It's much better to understand that thought
by itself is like a wild animal. It's just running around. So tell it to stop. You learn to just let
go of the thoughts or to watch them and not believe them. If they're not going to stop,
you learn to watch them and not believe them. Eventually, they go away and then thought becomes
very useful. When I need it for science, it's far more useful, but when I need creativity,
in many cases, thought is the background I need. I need to have done my homework. I need to have read,
but then when the true creativity is often something that transcends any thought.
So learning the care and feeding of thought and to train it and to not let it run you,
but to have you use it as a tool and be able to put that tool down when you don't need it anymore
or when you don't want to use it. So the tool tends to run us. It tends to tell you who I am
no thought can tell me who I am. That's it. That's one of the key things. There is no thought.
I am such and such a scientist. I am the owner of this car. I am such and such. My name is,
I did this. I am the president of that. I have this big cap. All these thoughts
don't get anywhere close at all to telling you who you really are. They're distractions.
You can only find out who you are in utter and complete interior silence. That's the only time
when you will actually find out who you really are and no thought is ever adequate.
Yeah, that reminds me too. A few minutes ago you mentioned something about Benedictine
monks. Are you familiar with Joseph Campbell? Yes, in his work. Yeah, he was for folks who
audience who is not familiar. He was a mythological and religious historian and teacher
for like 38 years, I think at St. Lawrence College. He had this great anecdote how he went to,
I think it was in Thailand. He went to some conference that was between
Buddhists and Catholics and a meeting of the minds. He said, the theologians that met on both sides
were just talking past each other. They could not understand each other's theologies.
But the monks on both sides, the Buddhist monks and the Catholic monks, they were like,
oh yeah, we get it. We're in the same wavelength. We're doing the same thing. We're talking the
same kind of process. We're getting the same feelings. That's what I think you alluded to
before. These like different mystical traditions and the practices that they have, there's a lot
of overlap between them and the kind of interior Meister Eckhart is another one. There's so much
overlap that it seems like we're doing the same thing and it's just a different window dressing
of the different traditions that are there. I agree. When you go into silent,
then all those trappings disappear and you get in touch with the same thing.
Yeah. Unfortunately, I have to take off. Yeah. I think that's a wonderful place to end.
And I just so appreciate your time, Don. Thank you again. Thank you. It was a great pleasure.
Wonderful. And thank you also. I really like that you bring up these questions that people have
because I do like to try to address the questions and that this is very, very good. Thank you.
Yes, I appreciate it. Yeah, I'm sure there'll be even more coming. And I will overlay the,
because a few questions I had in mind, but I can't remember the commenters' names, but I'll
overlay them when those sections come along. And yeah, thank you again, Don. I wish you all the
best and appreciate it so much. Thank you, Carlos. Great pleasure. Take care.